# Project: Data Modeling with Postgres

## Introduction

A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

### Objective

The purpose of project is to create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis, which includes:

- create a database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis

- test the database and ETL pipeline by running queries given by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare the results with their expected results

## Datasets

There are two datasets: song and log datasets

### Song Dataset

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the [Million Song Dataset](https://labrosa.ee.columbia.edu/millionsong/). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
```

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```

### Log Dataset

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this [event simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim) based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
```

Using pandas to create a pandas dataframe to read the data:

```
df = pd.read_json(filepath, lines=True)
```

## Schema for Song Play Analysis

Using the song and log datasets to create a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis which includes the following tables.

### Fact Table

- **songplays** - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page `NextSong`
    - `songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent`

### Dimension Tables

- **users** - users in the app
    - `user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level`
- **songs** - songs in music database
    - `song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration`
- **artists** - artists in music database
    - `artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude`
- **time** - timestamps of records in **songplays** broken down into specific units
    - `start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday`
    
## Files descriptions

- `data` folder provides the data of `song` and `log` datasets

- `test.ipynb` displays the first few rows of each table to check the database.

- `create_tables.py` drops and creates the tables. This file must be run to reset the tables before each time ETL scripts are run.

- `etl.ipynb` reads and processes a single file from song_data and log_data and loads the data into the tables. This notebook contains detailed instructions on the ETL process for each of the tables.

- `etl.py` reads and processes files from `song_data` and `log_data` and loads them into the tables. This file is filled out based on the ETL notebook.

- `sql_queries.py` contains all the SQL queries, and is imported into the last three files above.

- `README.md` provides discussion on your project.

## Instruction for ETL pipeline

- Download the repository to your computer, make sure that you have Postgres SQL, and python packages: `psycopg2`, `pandas`, `sql_queries`.

- Run `create_tables.py` to initialise the database.

- Start and run `test.ipynb` to confirm all tables were created. Restart the kernel.

- Start and run `etl.ipynb` to ensure the transformation and loading scripts work for a single file from `song_data` and `log_data` and loads the data into the tables. Restart the kernel.

- Run `create_tables.py` to re-initialise the database.

- Run `etl.py` to start the ETL data pipeline from JSON logs in the data folder to the Sparkify database